Two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
Testing, testing, testing.
Today is January the 22nd in the Wiener Building and I have the honor and pleasure of interviewing Dr. Sam, or in this would it be Samuel?
Samuel M. Dr. Samuel M. Gillespie, professor of... Marketing.
Marketing.
about his 30-plus years of service here.
To introduce yourself to anyone who might hear this tape or read the transcription, describe young Sam Gillespie, where did he grow up, what did his family do, where did he go to high school and then college, and all of your experience before coming here.
I was born August 9, 1934, in Shelbyville, Illinois, where my father was a high school coach.
My mother at that time was also, I have a sister who was one and a half at that time when I was born, and yet mom also was teaching shorthand and bookkeeping at Sparks Business College there in Shelbyville.
In 1940 my father, excuse me, in 1936 my father got a coaching job at Charleston, Illinois at the high school, home of Eastern Illinois State Teachers College at that time.
We moved there in 1936 and in 1940 he
I stopped coaching.
My sister and I and my family moved to my grandparents on my mother's side to a town called St.
Elmo, E-L-M-O.
about 60 miles, 70 miles west of there in Fayette County where my grandfather owned and operated a Chevrolet dealership.
I grew up in St.
Elmo from 1940 all the way through high school.
Played and did the normal things, Boy Scouts, Eagle Scouts, track, played basketball and football and track, no baseball, since that was not a sport.
Graduated from St.
Elmo High School in 52, went to the University of Illinois.
pledged and became an active in Tal Kappa Epsilon fraternity.
My freshman year I attempted to sing in the men's glee club, but they had me at first tenor and I wasn't a first tenor and it would strain my voice and I couldn't handle that.
They had enough second tenors apparently.
I also took as my P.E.
wrestling and won at my weight the university level competition.
And the wrestling coach asked me to come out and participate in the following semester, which I did, and the following fall I did.
But I was, couldn't, couldn't compete at the level, the kids out of Chicago, so that was short-lived.
I majored in what we called the College of Commerce and Business Administration and degree in marketing.
Met my wife in February of 54.
My wife, Pat Johnson at that time, Pat grew up in a Swedish community in western Illinois, a town called Monmouth, or on a farm south of Monmouth.
Monmouth had its own college there, Monmouth College, where I think the
Pi Beta Phi's began, I think the Thetas may have begun there, back in the turn of the century.
And she was a cheerleader and homecoming queen and all the things, and raised cattle for competition at the fair.
And I met her through my
roommate who was engaged to Pat's roommate.
From there we began dating and we married in the summer of 55.
She graduated with a degree in sociology and I continued on for the next year.
Graduated in spring of 56 and had my first job with Sears Roebuck and Company in Dubuque, Iowa.
stayed in Dubuque, Iowa.
One of our sons, our first son, Samuel Arvind, and the Arvinds after Pat's father, Arvind Johnson.
Sam was born there in 59.
My parents wanted me to come back and run a furniture store my mother had started in the early 50s, wanted me to run it, and I said I would.
So we packed up and moved back to southern Illinois.
And I ran that operation until 63.
And my business was getting very good and growing, but more and more my business was coming from out of the community.
It was a town of 1200 in St.
Elmo was.
I noticed that a larger share of the business was coming out of other communities, and so I bought a property over in the county seat called Vandalia, second capital, state capital for the state of Illinois at that time until Mr. Lincoln moved it to Springfield.
And bought a piece of property and was going one day going over to sign the papers and came to the bluff of the Kaskaskia River and headed down the bluff and said, man, I'm going to be in debt a long time.
Stopped the car, turned around, came back and said, we're going to sell the business.
And Pat asked what I was going to do.
And I said, I don't know, but I didn't think I wanted to spend the rest of my life there in St.
Elmo.
And my wife said, amen.
And by that time, we had a second child born in the hospital in Fayette County there, David.
David was born in 60.
So we sold the business and had a grand sale and made a lot of money going out of business.
I've always said there's two ways to make a lot of money in the furniture store and that's to have a grand opening and a going out of business sale.
So we took our profits and moved to Champaign, Illinois where I
It must have looked pretty nice to the department head and he let me start the master's program and from there it's kind of history because I enjoyed what I was doing, enjoyed getting in the library, enjoyed getting my hands dirty, enjoyed reading and enjoyed all aspects, I guess, of university life.
kind of drugged my feet on the masters, hadn't got my masters completed except for the, we had to do thesis in those times and didn't have the thesis completed but said I wanted to go on for the PhD and they said fine and finally completed the thesis.
Somewhere along in 65 or 66, I began to do some teaching and then an opening came for the assistant dean.
We had a turnover of deans, Paul Green, one of the deans retired,
An interim, another dean, Joe McCarthy, John, Joe, well, Joe McCarthy, but it's not the same Joe McCarthy we know of, I guess, but came and stayed a short while and was disenchanted with the community and left, and an interim dean by the name of Vern Zimmerman stepped in as associate dean, and I helped him run the undergraduate program, and it was there.
Part of my job was if Vern was tied up, I would take some of the visitors, meet them at the airport, bring them in, take them out to dinner, chat with them, so that they might not be alone that evening.
So one time Vern said, there's a gentleman coming from Texas A&M up to interview some people from accounting.
that were finishing a PhD in accounting, and he was up here, and I think his name was Jack Coleman.
I think Coleman was the head of the accounting department, and this was in, must have been in early 67, late 66, early 67.
And I met Jack at the airport, took him to the Urbana Lincoln Hotel.
We had a toddy or two, and then the next day he visited with Vern, and I took him back to the airport.
Maybe I had lunch with him, I can't recall.
and said goodbye.
I was finishing up my work all but ABD and so I was looking around and I guess I had shared with Jack that I was looking around and I had interviewed at Georgia and at Memphis State and South Carolina.
Patty and I and I all wanted to come south and at VPI at Blacksburg and had an offer from Georgia and Jack
Sent me a letter, said, you're looking around, why don't you take a look at A&M?
And I, gosh, I didn't know too much about A&M at all, very little.
And I said, well, why not?
I came down here and left in a snowstorm and got down here.
It was nice and sunny today, about like today in the 50s, bright sky, bright Texas sun, and I met with Jim McNeil.
I met with John Pearson and some of the other people, and a little bit later,
There was an Allied Social Sciences meeting in Washington, D.C.
Illinois was going to be at it.
Texas A&M and other schools were going to be at it, and so when I got there, John Pearson was there and Bill Eccles, who ran the executive development program, was there.
Who was the head of the management department?
Military guy?
Oh, well, he was there as well, and I'll think of the name.
names wasn't there.
I'm not sure whether Clint Phillips was at that meeting or not, but there were several people there.
What year is this?
This was in December of 66 or January of 67.
I returned and had an offer from John Pearson.
And like I said, I'd accepted a job.
Not accepted.
I had an offer from Georgia.
So I called Jim McNeil, knowing that he'd been in Georgia the year before or two years before.
I said, Jim, I just wanted to call you and tell you that I'm going to accept the job at the University of Georgia.
But now that I have, tell me why you left Georgia.
and uh takes Jim a long while to get words out and it was a long conversation I've learned that you don't want to go into his office because it'd be a long time getting out but uh the upshot of it was that uh after Jim finished talking I went back to Pat and kind of struggled with it and and I called Georgia and said I wasn't coming and called Jim and said that I was and and so I had an offer
I was making $9,000.
I was making $1,000 a month or $9,000 on nine months at Illinois in my job as dean.
I think $9,000 on 12 months because it was an administrative job.
This job paid, I was offered $12,000 and it was not the best offer dollar and cents wise.
In fact, it was the third lowest offer that I had.
And I was getting $12,000 for nine months with the opportunity to perhaps teach in the summer and get outside money.
So, gosh, that looks pretty good for a kid who at one time in his life probably might have sold his soul to Satan because I recall saying, if I could ever make $10,000 a year, guaranteed to make $10,000 a year the rest of my life, I would take that job.
Because I was making $400 a month about there in the furniture business, and we were saving money at $400 a month in this little town.
So, you know, now you're making $1,000 a month, or $12,000 for nine months.
I mean, it's pretty high on the hog.
As you look back, what were the real reasons that caused you to accept the A&M offer?
The real reasons?
I don't know.
Part of it was the adventure of it.
Was there any impression you received of the institution when you came that was an important factor?
No, no.
Well, no, no.
I liked the community.
Ronnie Hale, as soon as he knew that I was coming, Ronnie Hale got on the horn, and Travis Engelbrick, I think Travis got on the horn, but no, it was just good people, good people.
And I guess kind of looking at the opportunity, I was aware that they had just named, just the fall that I came, the fall of 68 was the first, was when the College of Business began.
Maybe there was an empty barrel out there in a sense and I had an opportunity to help fill the barrel.
Describe physically, describe the move of you and your family down here.
Oh, that was an adventure.
Keep in mind, people raised in the Depression don't like to spend a lot of money.
And even though my parents were relatively wealthy, there was something about me that I just was kind of tight.
So when we moved from Champaign to Dubuque, I got John Stein to move me.
When I moved from Dubuque back down to St.
Elmo, I had John Stein move me.
Now, you know, that's $200.
Old cattle truck, get up there, help him load it, and follow John home, or send him six hours ahead of us, and we take off, and we meet him about wherever.
I had a friend who was a farmer over in a little town called Greymont, Illinois, north of Bloomington, and we'd go pheasant hunting up there.
And so Paul Forney, I talked to Paul, and he says, you know, I go down and get some bulls down around Brenham.
Why don't I just take a bigger truck and we'll load you up and we'll take you down there.
Well, how much did you take me down there?
I don't know, three or four hundred dollars.
So Paul came down with another guy and Patty and I meticulously had loaded everything and we sat out there and Paul pulled up in his truck and he bought the smaller truck.
And this was a Sunday.
And so we loaded as much as we could on that cattle truck and we looked around town for a U-Haul and finally hauled somebody out.
Put a hitching rack on this old Chevy two station wagon that I had, a 1963 Chevy two station wagon, had a lot of miles but at that time.
And put a U-Haul on the back of that and that station wagon had no air conditioning.
And we got everything packed and we left Champaign about 11 o'clock at night.
We called ahead to where Pat's brother lived out in Frontenac and west suburbs of St.
Louis.
And it was kind of a contrast really here.
Here were these kids.
I mean these windows rolled down in late July, August, nowhere in condition, pulling this U-Haul trailer in a Chevy 2 station wagon that had a dented inside.
Might have had a hubcap gone, pulling into west suburb of St.
Louis, where a past brother was president of Carter Carburetor and lived in pretty high style.
And here were these Squatleys pulling in.
there at night, and we stayed there all night and took off early in the morning and headed to Texas.
I don't know where we stayed all night, can't remember that, but I do know we came driving down Highway 6 on 79 through Franklin and then came on in to Hearn, turned south there at Hearn, and that's not a real appetizing drive.
from, uh, from Franklin into there and of course we just kind of looked at it and shut our eyes and drove on and pulled in here and, uh, and we bought a home from, uh, that Ernie Sims had built in 64 and, uh, uh, back up, need to back up just a little bit.
We'd come down in, uh, in June of 68, Patty and I, to look at College Station.
Ronnie Hale and Travis Engelbrecht were trying to get our, our, uh,
real estate business.
And we were taken around by Bessie Lou Barron, I wanna think that's her name, Bessie Lou Barron, real estate guy.
And we were looking at houses, and we thought we could afford probably something that was in the neighborhood of $16,000 or $17,000.
That's about where we figured we could, because we didn't have much money.
We'd worn out everything.
The washing machine was worn out.
The dryer was worn out.
Our clothes were worn out.
The car was worn out.
We pretty much used up all our assets.
The only thing we had was on the come.
And so I'd put an ad in the Brian paper that a young professor from the University of Illinois was looking for a home to buy.
So I got a note from Jean Marie Anderson and Wally Anderson about their homes.
weren't going to put it on the market hadn't even put it in the classified but saw my ad so we called down and got an appointment to meet them Bessie Lou took us around town and we gosh she sold some houses you know that were you know thirty thousand dollars or thirty two thousand dollars and and we just there was no way we could afford that and Bessie Lou would have said honey
Honey, those bankers just dying to loan you money.
Absolutely dying to loan you.
You work at the University.
You're the best credit there is out there.
So we drove up in front of the house we now lived in for the last 33 years and drove up in front of there and we looked at that and we said, man there's no way we can afford that house.
And we said, well, gosh, we've already got this apartment and we must go in.
Jean Marie met us at the door, and she showed us around the house, and gosh, we really liked the house.
And she says, I said, how much is the house?
And she says, it's $26,500.
But the real, you'll have to ask my husband Wally what the real price is.
And Patty and I had left, and I said, well, I don't know.
I sure like it.
Didn't know.
So we, next day, we see Wally, and he introduced himself, went down to Lily Dairy, where he worked at Lily Dairy.
I guess it was on his wife's side, because she was an edge.
And Wally says, well, my wife mispriced the house to you.
I said, oh my.
She priced you at $26.5 or $26.8.
And I said, that's right.
And she says, well, that's not the price.
It's $25.2 or $25.3 or something like that.
So we bought the house and we split the closing cost.
We walked across the street to Lawrence Title.
And the closing cost was $120.
So I wrote a check for 60.
Oh, I had to have a down payment.
Wally loaned me $2,000 had to have $4,500 Wally loaned me $2,000 and Ronnie Hale, Marshall Peters and them loaned me $2,500 so I had I had borrowed $4,500
And I wrote a check for $60 and I moved into my house on 4100 Tanglewood and I've lived there ever since.
That makes you feel good when bankers like that treat you that way.
Now that's the summer of 68.
And what was the weather like?
The weather was hot.
And when you come into town with a car with no air conditioning, you remember that.
But by the way, I kept that car until 1975.
We finally got a car in 72, 1972 I believe, or 73.
We got a used car off of Charles Broach.
He was a national car rental there at the corner of, at that time it was the corner of Texas Avenue and the University.
But Charlie Broach had a car there and I bought one of his cars used.
And so I went from 68 to 72 driving a car with no air conditioning.
All right, then you can't describe coming out here to the campus and becoming a member of the department.
Well, the department, if you wanted to call it a department, there were five of us.
Uh, those five, Jim McNeil had one secretary, and I forget her name, Elizabeth or Catherine, but anyway, but had one secretary.
Everything was done on a little ditto paper.
I think that's what they call it, a ditto paper, and all the tests and exams.
And, uh, uh, Herb Thompson was here.
He'd been, Herb had come in 51.
Barbara Davis later married Barbara and became Barbara Cole, but Barbara was here.
I'd come the year before from Northwestern.
There was a guy by the name of Jerry, and I want to say Reeves, but that's not right.
It was Jerry Reynolds or somebody.
He was a lecturer, and I was the fifth one.
So there was Jim McNeil, Herb Thompson, Barbara Davis, this Jerry, and myself.
And that was the department.
And who was the department head?
Jim McNeil.
And Jim had come the year before in 67.
And Jim retired, stayed until last year and retired after this.
And the dean, of course, was John Pearson.
Describe him in those early months.
You know, I guess I don't know how to describe him.
John's pretty laid back.
Could be quite serious when it came to be serious.
But I think he tried to treat us as family, really looked at us as family.
We were a small college, a lot of new people.
And the word college was then used for business.
It had been a school.
It had been a school or division.
But it was then a college.
And Leland, I think, was that his name?
I never met the gentleman who was the director of that and John came over.
and took over that position.
What was your impression of John's capability as a leader for the future?
Oh, at the time, I think it was adequate.
I think there was a time where John grew out.
No, no, I was meaning that first.
Oh, I think John, yeah, I was John.
And he was all, in fact, as I look back,
I might have been one of his favorites because I seem to get all the nice things.
I remember Haskell for the Centennial Committee, those are years later, but John could have picked somebody else but he picked me and I got to be on that.
If there was something to be done, somehow I got to be over on some other committee.
I got a lot of kudos off of that.
And where were you all quartered?
We were quartered in Francis Hall.
And my first office was with a gentleman who has since deceased was a young man by the name of Page, Bob Page.
Bob is a good old strong Baptist boy.
I think he left out of three or four years and went up to Baylor.
But Bob and I were literally, I think, in a broom closet.
A big broom closet, but it was long and narrow.
And John had a philosophy that you've got to suffer if you want to have improvement.
And he said you've got to bleed in the streets.
And if you bleed in the streets long enough and show how much anguish you have, maybe you can get somebody's attention.
So he'd cram us all in.
And you'd say, just hold on, hold on, you know, things are going to get better.
Was there anything in the department or the college to introduce you and your wife to the others?
Not that I recall.
I don't, I don't recall that we had a faculty meeting and were introduced.
I think, and we may have, I just don't recall.
But one thing's that we would have.
Now, there were two things that happened every year.
maybe more than that, maybe it was twice a year, but I think just once every year.
First of all, Citizens Bank.
which later became City National Bank, I think when it was Citizens Bank, Marshall Peters Bank, would have, and he may have for other departments, but he'd have a fish fry or a barbecue or something out at the Peters Ranch.
Out in the country.
Out in the country, out off Tabor Road.
And the College of Business would go out there and drink some beer and shoot down some shots and fry some fish and sit there until dark.
and get up and come back.
And that's how you got to know, the bankers got to know you and you got to know the other people and listen to the old timers talk.
Satch was there and Packingham and Dan, I can't remember, helped the assistant dean, I'll think of these names, maybe Dan Long, I think it was Long.
But you got to meet some of those people.
And then the other event that John liked to do was have a get-together, I think it might have been at the end of the semester,
the summer but we'd have a barbecue and and we'd move from place to place as because you'd have to have a bigger place as the faculty grew but one of the places and two of the places i remember we had one was at uh at the old shiloh hall south of town which later became the shiloh cafe and i think rant not randy but uh oh uh the shop putter who was a shop putter here from a&m
Yeah, I think Randy Manson may have owned that Shiloh Hall down there and turned it before he came up and worked.
But in any event, before that ever became anything, we rented that out and get a barbecue, get a briskets or two, and John come down early in the morning, start the fire, and in the afternoon he'd get out his old swab and swab down the briskets and
And John didn't drink but he also, there was plenty of beer and hard liquor there if you wanted to and he'd bring in either a little country band or he'd bring in a DJ and he'd sit there and he could dance and have the best fun and then everybody else I think may have brought a covered dish or something like that.
We also did that up at the American Legion.
Before you began or as you began, did anybody give you any advice, guidelines of how to relate to A&M students?
Did anybody attempt to?
No.
There was no introduction.
There was no orientation.
I can remember some incidences.
At that time, of course, I came in 68, and that's five years after I became co-ed, but there weren't many co-eds out there.
No dormitory yet.
There weren't much room for there.
And I can remember classes, many classes, having all male.
and i can remember that if there were a female they were clearly not more than two or three and as these girls would come into the class for the first day of school or there they would go you'd hear this
It was to suggest to you that you were not really part of them.
That first semester, do you remember what your workload was?
How many courses?
Yeah, I had two preps and two sections.
Two sections of each?
Probably.
I don't think I may have had 12 hours, but they were basic marketing and another class.
Maybe I had nine hours, I don't know.
About how many?
30 to 40 depending on where you were, which course you were teaching in the system.
But I do know one time I went in to teach a course that Jim had me teach.
It was a capstone course, and I've been teaching that class for the last 20 years.
But it was interesting.
I went into that class intimidated.
I really wasn't prepared to teach that class.
I turned around and came to Jim and I said, Jim, I don't think I can teach that class.
And he said, fine, I'll take it over.
And so Jim went in and taught the class and I taught whatever he was teaching and I just felt much better.
And I really appreciated that because I didn't think I was given the textbook that was being used and I don't think I was the one that chose the textbook.
And so I felt bad.
You as a non-Texan, as a Midwesterner, describe how, what your impression was and your feelings about the students at first here.
Well, I just thought, keep in mind, you got to keep my background.
I grew up in southern Illinois and grew up in an oil town.
And those oil, the wells there,